Announcing calloop 0.7 (#9)
Smithay/smithay.github.io: content/calloop-v0.7.markdown

Title: Version 0.7 of calloop
Date: 2020-10-09 19:00
Category: Releases
Slug: calloop-v-0-7
Authors: Victor Berger
Summary: Announcement of version 0.7 of calloop, and a presentation of the crate.

We just released [version 0.7](https://github.com/Smithay/calloop/releases/tag/v0.7.0) of
[calloop](https://docs.rs/calloop), the callback-based event loop that backs

> [Smithay](https://github.com/Smithay/smithay) and optionnaly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Smithay](https://github.com/Smithay/smithay) and optionally
```

> [SCTK](https://github.com/Smithay/client-toolkit). As the crate is now getting mature, it is time

Reviewer: Reading the markdown form would be easier if the links were just `[SCTK]` with the target defined at the end of the section as

```md
[SCTK]: https://github.com/Smithay/client-toolkit
```

;)

for a formal presentation!

## Callbacks, in Rust?

It is commonly acknowledged that in Rust, callback-based designs induce a lot of friction, in
particular regarding state sharing. Nobody wants to have `Rc<RefCell<_>>` littered all around their
codebase, and so naturally most of the ecosystem turned to async/await, a design much more natural
given the constraints of the language.

However, not all usecases play well with async/await, notably cases were you are in a purely
reactive context: waiting for events and quickly reacting to them. Indeed, why would you use
async/await if you never need to `.await` anything? This is for a large part our context of

> work in Smithay, and so we developped calloop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
work in Smithay, and so we developed calloop.
```

Calloop is designed trying to ease the friction with Rust as much as possible. The central
issue, state sharing, is managed though some global shared data. When you're running your event
loop, you can provide the method with a `&mut Data` reference, that is then passed down to all
of your callbacks. If this `Data` contains the state of your app, all your callbacks can then
access it as if they were all methods of the same object.

> In a nutshell, calloop is mostly targetted at apps that spend a large portion of their time just

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a nutshell, calloop is mostly targeted at apps that spend a large portion of their time just
```

> waiting for something to happen, and need to quickly react to it. As opposed to apps that need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
waiting for something to happen, and need to quickly react to it as opposed to apps that need
```

to manage numerous computations or sockets in parallel efficiently, which is the more common

> use of async/await. This processing can be suited to GUI apps notably, in particular on X11 or

Reviewer: 'can be suited to' seems weird (not sure if incorrect though), I'd expect 'is suitable for' or something entirely different.

Wayland contexts, where the communication with the display server is made over an Unix socket,
which can be monitored by APIs like `epoll` or `kqueue`.

## How is it used?

Calloop's core is the `EventLoop` type. As you can tell by its name, it is the event loop. Once

> you've prepared everything, you just call `EventLoop::run(...)` and that method will block, running

Reviewer: "Once you've prepared everything" seems very vague. I can only guess what this could mean.

your event loop and invoking the appropriate callbacks at the appropriate moment. Setting up these
callbacks is done though two main components: the `LoopHandle` object, and the `EventSource` trait.

The `LoopHandle` is a handle to the `EventLoop` (duh). This handle can be cloned and shared in
different parts of your program. This handle is what is used to setup new callbacks, which can thus

> be done from mostly anywhere, even within a callback! The notable constraint being that the handle is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be done from mostly anywhere, even within a callback! The notable constraint to this is that the handle is
```

makes sense without this change, but my sense of language tells me this reads better with there being a sentence split.

not shareable between threads. Calloop is meant to run the event loop on a single thread.

The `EventSource` trait is a generic interface for "something that can generate events". Anything
implementing that trait can be associated to a callback in the `EventLoop`. It will be monitored
and the associated callback will be invoked every time the event source generates an event. This
trait is meant to be composable: one can implement a high-level event source by wrapping a low-level
one and further processing its event before passing them along.

To give you a feel of what it looks like, take a look at this example extracted from the documentation:

```rust

> extern crate calloop;

Reviewer: Do we really need this in examples nowadays? :wink:

use calloop::{generic::Generic, EventLoop, Interest, Mode};

use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    // Create the event loop
    let mut event_loop = EventLoop::try_new()
                .expect("Failed to initialize the event loop!");

>     // Retrieve an handle. It is used to insert new sources into the event loop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Retrieve a handle. It is used to insert new sources into the event loop
```

>     // It can be cloned, allowing you to insert sources from within source callbacks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // It can be cloned, allowing you to insert sources from within callbacks
```

or is there some other sort of callback in this context?

Reviewer: If there is, I am confused ^^

    let handle = event_loop.handle();

    // Inserting an event source takes this general form
    // it can also be done from within the callback of an other event source
    handle.insert_source(
        // a type implementing the EventSource trait
        source,
        // a callback that is invoked whenever this source generates an event
        |event, metadata, shared_data| {
            // This callback is given 3 values:
            // - the event generated by the source
            // - &mut access to some metadata, specific to the event source
            // - &mut access to the global shared data that was passed to EventLoop::dispatch
        }
    );

    // Actual run of your loop
    //
    // Dispatch received events to their callbacks, waiting at most 20 ms for
    // new events between each batch.
    //
    // The `&mut shared_data` is a mutable reference that will be forwarded to all
    // your callbacks, allowing them to easily share some state
    event_loop.run(Duration::from_millis(20), &mut shared_data, |shared_data| {
        /*

>         * Insert here the processing you need to do do between each waiting batch (if any)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        * Insert here the processing you need to do between each waiting batch (if any)
```

>         * like invoking your drawing logic if you're doing a GUI app for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        * like invoking your drawing logic if you're writing a GUI app for example.
```

        */
    });
}
```

Calloop provides a few implementation of the `EventSource` trait such as a timer, a channel, and a
generic adapter for monitoring a file descriptor for read/write readiness. At the moment calloop

> only supports Linux and the *BSD systems, but support for other platforms would be accepted if
> contributed!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only supports Linux and the *BSD systems, but adding support for other platforms would be a welcome contribution!
```

## Can it work alongside async/await?

> Since this new version, yes! Even is the core of your app works best will callbacks, some part of your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this new version, yes! Even if the core of your app works best will callbacks, some part of your
```

> needs might benefit from async/await. Since this last version, calloop allows you to mix both paradigms.

Reviewer: 'Since this last version' should probably be 'With this new version' again, or 'Since 0.7', or 'With the latest release'. Either way not 'last' (otherwise it kinda sounds like there will be no new versions after this one) and 'Since this (new|latest) version' sounds weird too (can't explain why though, sorry :sweat_smile:).

> This is done thanks to two separate parts newly added to calloop: an async IO adapter, and an executor.

Reviewer: Sounds a bit weird, maybe

```suggestion
This is supported by two separate parts newly added to calloop: an async IO adapter, and an executor.
```

Although I'm not 100% happy with that either.

The async IO adapter provides an `Async` type similar to the one provided by the
[`async-io`](https://docs.rs/async-io) crate, but instead of spawning a background thread, it monitors
the readiness of IO objects directy in the associated `EventLoop`.

> The futures executor is, unsuprisingly, yet another implementation of the `EventSource` trait, which can

Reviewer: > unsurprisingly

I think this is only obvious to people intimately familiar with different event loop designs and whatever. Probably okay to keep as-is though.

Reviewer: Actually

```suggestion
The executor is, unsuprisingly, yet another implementation of the `EventSource` trait, which can
```

since it was referred to just as 'executor' before and the term seems pretty unambiguous here.

> thus be inserted into an `EventLoop` just like any other. It is paired with a cloneable `Scheduler`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thus be inserted into an `EventLoop` just like any other source. It is paired with a cloneable `Scheduler`,
```
